There is no human experience that can be termed true science unless it
can be mathematically demonstrated.  And if thou sayest that the
sciences which begin and end in the mind are true, this cannot be
conceded, but must be denied for many reasons, and firstly because in
such mental discourses experience is eliminated, and without experience
there can be no certainty.
You must first propound the theory and then explain the practice.
Let no man who is not a mathematician read the principles of my work.
In the course of scientific exposition the demonstration of a general
rule derived from a previous conclusion is not to be censured.
He who blames the supreme certainty of mathematics feeds on confusion
and will never be able to silence the contradictions or sophistical
sciences which lead to an everlasting clamour.
There is no certainty [in science] where one of the mathematical
sciences cannot be applied, or in those [sciences] which are not in
harmony with mathematics.
Syllogism: to speak doubtfully.
Sophism: to speak confusedly; falsehood for truth.
Theory: knowledge without practice.
Science is that discourse of the mind which derives its origin from
ultimate principles beyond which nothing in nature can be found which
forms a part of that science: as in the continued quantity, that is to
say, the science of geometry, which, starting from the surfaces of
bodies, has its origin in the line, which is the end of the
superficies; and we are not satisfied by this, because we know that the
line terminates in the point, and the point is that which is the least
of things.  Therefore the point is the first principle of geometry, and
nothing else can exist either in nature or in the human mind from
which the point can issue.  Because if you say that the contact between
a surface and the extreme point of an iron instrument is the creation
of the point, it is not true; but let us say that this point of contact
is a superficies which surrounds its centre, and in the centre the
point dwells.  And such a point is not a part of the substance of the
superficies, neither it nor all the points of the universe can, even if
combined,--it being granted that they could be combined,--compose any
part of a superficies.  And granted, as you imagined, a whole composed
of a thousand points, if we divide any part of this quantity of a
thousand, we can very well say that this part shall equal its whole;
and this we can prove by zero, or naught, that is, the tenth figure of
arithmetic, which is represented by a cipher as being nothing, and
placed after unity it will signify 10, and if two ciphers are placed
after unity it will signify 100, and thus the number will go on
increasing by ten to infinity whenever a cipher is added, and the
cipher in itself is worth nothing more than naught, and all the naughts
in the universe are equal to one naught alone, in regard to their
substance and value.
Knowledge which is the issue of experience is termed mechanical; that
which is born and ends in the mind is termed scientific; that
which issues from science and ends in manual work is termed
semi-mechanical.  But I consider vain and full of error that science
which is not the offspring of experience, mother of all certitude, and
which does not result in established experience, that is to say, whose
origin, middle and end do not pass through any of the five senses.  And
if we doubt of everything we perceive by the senses, should we not
doubt much more of what is contrary to the senses, such as the
existence of God and of the soul, and similar matters constantly under
dispute and contention?
And it is truly the case that where reason is lacking it is
supplemented by noise, which never happens in matters of certainty.  On
account of this we will say that where there is noise there is no true
science, because truth has one end only, which, when it is made known,
eternally silences controversy, and should controversy come to life
again, it is lying and confused knowledge which is reborn, and not
certainty.  But true science is that which has penetrated into the
senses through experience and silenced the tongue of the disputers, and
which does not feed those who investigate it with dreams, but proceeds
from the basis of primary truths and established principles
successively and by true sequence to the end; as, for instance, what
comes under the heading of elementary mathematics, that is,
numeration and measurement, termed arithmetic and geometry, which treat
with the highest truth of the discontinued and continued quantity.
Here there will be no dispute as to whether twice three make more or
less than six, nor whether two angles of a triangle are less than two
right angles, but eternal silence shall ignore all controversy, and the
devotees of the true science will finish their studies in peace, which
the lying mental sciences cannot do.  And if thou sayest that true and
established science of this kind is a species of mechanics, because
they can only be completed by the hand, I will say the same of all the
arts, such as that which passes through the hand of the sculptor, which
is a kind of drawing, a part of painting; and astrology and the other
sciences pass through manual operation, but they are mental in the
first place, as painting, which first of all exists in the mind of the
composer, and cannot attain to fulfilment without manual labour.  With
regard to painting, its true and scientific principles must be
established: what constitutes a shaded body, what constitutes a primary
shade, a derivative shade, what constitutes light: that is, darkness,
light, colour, size, shape, position, distance, propinquity, motion,
rest, which are comprehended by the mind only, and without manual
labour.  And this is the science of painting which remains in the mind
of those who meditate on it, from which issues the work in due
time, and is infinitely superior to the aforesaid contemplation or
science.
Mechanics are the paradise of scientific mathematics, because with them
we arrive at the fruits of mathematics.
Experience is indispensable for the making of any instrument.
Proportion is not only to be found in figures and measurements, but
also in sound, weight, time and position, and in whatever power which
exists.
The power of the projecting force increases in proportion as the object
projected is smaller; the acceleration of the motion increases to
infinity proportionately to this diminution.  It would follow that an
atom would be almost as rapid as the imagination or the eye, which in a
moment attains to the height of the stars, and consequently its voyage
would be infinite, because the thing which can be infinitely diminished
would have an infinite velocity and would travel on an infinite course
(because every continuous quantity is divisible to infinity).  And this
opinion is condemned by reason and consequently by experience.
Thus, you who observe rely not on authors who have merely by their
imagination wished to be interpreters between nature and man, but on
those alone who have applied their minds not to the hints of nature but
to the results of their experience.  And you must realize the
deceptiveness of experiments; because those which often appear to be
one and the same are often different, as is shown here.
A spherical body which possesses a dense and resisting superficies will
move as much in the rebound resulting from the resistance of a smooth
and solid plane as it would if you threw it freely through the air, if
the force applied be equal in both cases.
Oh, admirable justice of thine, thou first mover! thou hast not
permitted that any tone should fail to produce its necessary effects,
either as regards order or quantity.  Seeing that a force impels an
object which it overcomes a distance of one hundred arms' length, and
if in obeying this law it meets with resistance, thou hast ordained
that the force of the shock will cause afresh a further movement, which
in its various bounds recuperates the whole sum of the distance it
should have travelled.  And if you measure the distance accomplished by the aforesaid bounds you will find that they equal the
length of distance through which a similar object set in motion by an
equal force would travel freely through the air.
Every action must be caused by motion.
Motion is the cause of all life.
What is force?  Force, I say, is a spiritual virtue, an invisible
power, which by accidental external violence is caused by motion, and
communicated and infused into bodies which are inert by nature, giving
them an active life of marvellous power.
What is force?  I say that force is a spiritual, incorporate and
invisible power, which for a brief duration is produced in bodies that
by accidental violence are displaced from their natural state of
inertia.
Force arises from dearth or abundance; it is the child of physical
motion and the grandchild of spiritual motion, and the mother and
origin of gravity.  Gravity is confined to the elements of water
and earth, and this force is infinite, because infinite worlds could be
moved by it if instruments could be made by which the force could be
generated.  Force, with physical motion, and gravity, with resistance,
are the four accidental powers by which all mortal things live and die.
Force has its origin in spiritual motion, and this motion, flowing
through the limbs of sentient animals, enlarges their muscles, and thus
enlarged the muscles are shrunk in length and contract the tendons with
which they are connected, and this is the cause of the strength in
human limbs.  The quality and quantity of the strength of a man can
generate a further force, which will increase in proportion to the
duration of the motions produced by them.
Gravity, force and casual motion together with resistance are the four
external powers by which all the visible actions of man live and die.
A motion tends to be continuous; a body set in motion continues to move
as long as the impression of the motive power lasts in it.
The bird is an instrument which operates by mathematical laws, and man
can reproduce all the movements of this instrument, but cannot
attain to the intensity of its power; and can only succeed in acquiring
balance.  Thus we will say that such an instrument constructed by man
lacks only the soul of the bird, and the soul of man must counterfeit
the soul of the bird.  The spirit in the frame of the bird doubtless
would respond to needs of that frame better than would the spirit of
man, whose frame is different, more especially in the almost insensible
motions of balance; and since we see the bird make provision for the
many sensible varieties of movement, we can conclude by such experience
that man can acquire knowledge of the more markedly sensible of these
movements, and that he will be able to make ample provision against the
destruction of that instrument of which he has made himself the spirit
and the guide.
A natural and continuous motion seeks to preserve its course along the
line of its starting-point, that is to say, let us call starting-point
whatever place in which it varies.
Everything maintains itself by motion.  And if it were possible to
describe a diameter of air on the sphere of the earth, like to a well,
which would extend from one superficies to the other, and if a
weighty body were dropped into this well, the body would seek to remain
stationary at the centre, but so strong would be the impetus that for
many years it would prevent it from so doing.
Impetus is a virtue created by motion and communicated by the motive
force to the object moved, and this object acquires motion in
proportion to the energy of the impetus.
No lifeless matter moves of itself, but its motion is caused from
without.
All elements displaced from their natural place seek to return to it,
and more especially fire, water and earth.
All matter universally seeks to maintain itself in its natural state;
hence, water in motion seeks to maintain its course according to the
force by which it is propelled, and if it meets with opposition it
finishes the length of the course it began in a circular and reflex
motion.
Impetus is the impression of motion conveyed by the motive power to the
object moved.  Every impression tends to permanence or seeks to
attain permanence.  That every impression seeks after permanence is
proved by the impression made by the sun on the eye which regards it,
and in the impression of sound made by the hammer which strikes a bell.
Every impression seeks after permanence, as is shown in the image of
impetus communicated to the object moved.
A weight seeks to fall to the centre of the earth by the most direct
way.
If you look at the stars, warding off the rays (as may be done by
looking through a small hole made by the extreme point of a fine needle
placed so as almost to touch the eye), they will appear so small as to
seem as though nothing could be smaller; it is owing to their great
distance that they appear so small, for many of them are very many
times larger than the star which is the earth with its water.  Now
reflect what appearance this our star must have from so great a
distance, and then consider how many stars might be placed--both in
longitude and latitude--between those stars which are sown in the dark
space.  I can never refrain from blaming many of the ancients who said
that the size of the sun was no greater than it appears; among
whom was Epicurus.  I believe he founded his reasoning on a light
placed in our atmosphere equidistant from the centre of the earth,
which, to any one looking at it, never appears to diminish in size from
whatever distance it is seen.
I shall reserve the reasons of its size and power for later.  But I
greatly marvel that Socrates should have depreciated such a body, and
that he should have said that it resembled an incandescent stone; and
he who opposed him as regards this error acted rightly.  But I wish I
had words to blame those who seek to exalt the worship of men more than
that of the sun, since in the universe there is no body of greater
magnitude and power to be seen than the sun.  And its light illumines
all the celestial bodies which are distributed throughout the universe;
and the vital spark descends from it, because the heat which is in
living beings comes from the soul, and there is no other centre of heat
and light in the universe, as will be shown later; and it is certain
that those who have elected to worship men as gods--as Jupiter, Saturn,
Mars, &c.--have fallen into a profound error, since even if a man were
as great as our earth, he would have the appearance of a little star,
which appears like a dot in the universe; and moreover these men are
mortal, and decay and corrupt in their sepulchres.
Epicurus perhaps saw the shadows of columns on the walls in front of
them equal to the diameter of the column which cast the shadow; and
since the breadth of the shadows are parallel from beginning to end he
considered that he might infer that the sun also was directly opposite
to this parallel, and consequently no broader than the column; and he
did not perceive that the diminution of the shadow was insensibly small
owing to the great distance of the sun.  If the sun were smaller than
the earth, the stars in a great portion of our hemisphere would be
without light--in contradiction to Epicurus, who says the sun is only
as large as it appears to be.
Epicurus says the sun is the size it seems to be; hence, as it seems to
be a foot in breadth, we must consider that to be its size.  It follows
that when the moon eclipses the sun, the sun ought not to appear the
larger, as it does; hence, the moon being smaller than the sun, the
moon must be less than a foot in breadth, and consequently when the
earth eclipses the moon it must be less than a foot by a finger's
breadth; inasmuch as if the sun is a foot in breadth, and the earth
casts a conical shadow on the moon, it is inevitable that the luminous
cause of the conical shadow must be greater than the opaque body
which causes it.
Measure how many times the diameter of the sun will go into its course
in twenty-four hours.  And thus we can see whether Epicurus was correct
in saying the sun was only as large as it appeared to be; for as the
apparent diameter of the sun is about a foot, and as the sun would go a
thousand times into its course in twenty-four hours, it would have
travelled a thousand feet, that is, three hundred arms' length, which
is the sixth of a mile.  Thus the course of the sun during twenty-four
hours would have been the sixth part of a mile, and this venerable
snail, the sun, would have travelled twenty-five arms' length in an
hour.
They say that the sun is not hot because it is not the colour of fire
but whiter and clearer.  And the answer to this is that when molten
bronze is hottest it resembles the colour of the sun, and when it is
less hot it has the colour of fire.
It is proved that the sun is by nature hot and not cold, as has already
been stated.  If rays of fire play on a concave mirror when it is cold,
the rays refracted by the mirror will be hotter than the fire.
The rays emitted from a sphere of glass filled with cold water, which
are reflected from a fire, will be warmer than the fire.  It follows
from these two experiments that the heat of the rays reflected by the
mirror or the sphere of cold water are hot by virtue, and not because
the mirror or the sphere is hot; and in this case it occurs that the
sun, passing through these bodies, heats them by its virtue.  And owing
to this they have inferred that the sun is not hot,--which by the
aforesaid experiments has been proved to be exceedingly hot, by the
experiment of the mirror and the sphere, which are cold in themselves,
and reflect the hot rays of the fire and render them hotter, because
the first cause is hot; and the same thing occurs as regards the sun,
which, being hot in itself, and passing through these cold mirrors,
refracts great heat.  It is not the light of the sun which gives
warmth, but its natural heat.
The rays of the sun pass through the cold region of the air without any
change being effected in their nature, they pass through glasses full
of cold water without suffering change; through whatever transparent
spot they pass, it is as though they passed through so much air.
Some writers allege that the stars shine of themselves, saying
that if Venus and Mercury did not shine of themselves, when their light
comes between them and the sun they would darken as much of the sun as
they could hide from our eye; this is false, because it is proved that
a dark body placed against a luminous body is enveloped and altogether
covered by the lateral rays of the remaining part of that body, and
thus remains invisible; as may be proved when the sun is seen through
the boughs of a leafless tree at a long distance, the boughs do not
hide any portion of the sun from our eyes.  The same thing occurs with
the above-mentioned planets, which, though they have no light in
themselves, do not, as has been said, hide any portion of the sun from
our eyes.
Second proof.  They say that the stars shine most brightly at night in
proportion as they are high; and that, if they did not shine of
themselves, the shadow cast by the earth between them and the sun would
darken them, since they would not see nor be seen by the sun.  But
these have not taken into consideration that the conical shadow of the
moon does not reach many of the stars, and even for those it does reach
the shadow is diminished to such an extent that it covers very little
of the star, and the remaining part is illumined by the sun.
The moon having density and gravity, how does it stand?
No very light object is opaque.
Nothing light can remain beneath that which is heavier.
Whether the moon is the centre of its elements or not.  And if it
has no fixed position like the earth in the centre of its elements, why
does it not fall to the centre of our elements?  And if the moon is not
in the centre of its elements and does not fall, it must then be
lighter than any other element.  And if the moon is lighter than the
other elements, why is it opaque and not transparent?
No body which has density is lighter than the air.  Having proved that
the part of the moon which shines consists of water which mirrors the
body of the sun and reflects for us the splendour it receives from the
sun, and that if there were no waves in these waters, it would appear
small, but almost as bright as the sun--it must now be shown whether
the moon is a heavy or a light body; if it is a heavy body--admitting
that from the earth upwards with every grade of distance lightness must
increase, so that water is lighter than earth, air is lighter than
water, and fire lighter than air, and so on in succession--it
would seem that if the moon had density, as it has, it must have
gravity, and if it has gravity the space in which it lies could not
contain it, and consequently it would fall towards the centre of the
universe and be joined to the earth, or if not the moon itself, its
waters would fall from the moon and strip it and fall towards the
centre, leaving the moon bare and lustreless; whence, as this could not
happen, as reason would tell us, it is manifest that the moon is
surrounded by its elements, that is to say, water, air and fire, and
thus it sustains itself by itself in that space as our earth is
suspended with its elements in this part of space; heavy bodies act in
their elements there just as other heavy bodies act in ours.
A sound is produced by the movement of the air in friction against a
dense body, and should it be produced by two weighty bodies it is owing
to the atmosphere which surrounds them, and this friction consumes the
bodies, so that it follows that the spheres in their friction, owing to
there being no atmosphere between them, do not generate sound.  And if
this friction were a fact, during the many centuries the spheres have
revolved they would be consumed by the immense velocity expended daily;
and even if they produce sound, the sound could not travel, because the sound caused by percussion under water is scarcely
noticeable, and it would be less than noticeable in the case of dense
bodies.  The friction of polished bodies produces no sound, and similar
result would be produced in the contact or friction of the spheres; and
if the spheres are not polished in their contact and friction, it
follows that they are rough.
Again, their contact is not continuous; this being the case a vacuum is
produced, which it has been proved does not exist in nature.  Therefore
we conclude that friction would have consumed the ends of each sphere,
and in proportion as a sphere has a greater velocity in the centre than
at the poles, it would be consumed to a higher degree at the centre
than at the poles; and then the friction would cease, and the sound
would cease also, and the spheres would cease to revolve unless one
sphere revolved eastward and the other northward.
Worlds gravitate in the midst of their own elements.  The yellow or
yolk of an egg remains in the middle of the albumen without moving on
either side, and is lighter or heavier or equal to this albumen; and if
it is lighter it ought to rise above all the albumen and stop in
contact with the shell of the egg; and if it is heavier it ought to sink; and if it is equal to it, it can stand at one of the ends as
well as in the centre or below.
The object of my book is to prove that the ocean, with the other seas,
by means of the sun causes our world to shine like the moon and to
appear as a star to other worlds; and this I will prove.
In your discourse you must prove that the earth is a star like the
moon, and thus you will bear witness to the glory of our universe!  And
thus you must discourse on the size of many stars.
How the earth is a star.  The earth, in the midst of the sphere of
water which clothes the greater part of it, taking its light from the
sun and shining in the universe like the other stars, shows itself to
be a star as well.
First of all define the eye; then show how the twinkling of a star
exists really in the eye, and why one star should twinkle more than
another, and how the rays of the stars are born in the eye.  Say, that
if the twinkling of the stars were, as it appears to be, really in the
stars, that this twinkling appears to extend in proportion to the
body of the star.  The star, therefore, being larger than the earth,
this motion made in an instant of time would in its velocity double the
size of the star.  Then prove that the surface of the atmosphere,
contiguous to fire and the surface of fire, where it ends, is the point
in which the rays of the sun penetrate and bear the image of the
celestial bodies which are large when they rise and set, and small when
they are on the meridian.
The earth is not the centre of the orbit of the sun, nor the centre of
the universe, but in the centre of its companion elements and united
with them; and if any one were to stand on the moon when the moon and
the sun are beneath us, our earth, with its element of water, would
appear and shine for him just as the moon appears and shines for us.
The earth, shining like the moon, has lost a great part of its ancient
splendour by the decrease of the waters.
Nothing is generated in a place where is no sentient vegetable and
rational life; feathers grow on birds and change every year; coats grow
on animals and are changed every year, with some exceptions, like
the lion's beard and the cat's fur, and such; grass grows in the fields
and leaves on the trees; and every year they are renewed in great part.
Thus we can say that the spirit of growth is the soul of the earth, the
soil its flesh, the ordered arrangement of rocks its bones, of which
mountains are formed, the tufa its tendons; its blood the veins of
water which surround its heart, which is the ocean; its breathing and
increase and decrease of blood in the pulses the ebb and flood of the
sea; and the heat of the spirit of the world is fire which pervades the
earth, and the vital soul dwells in the fires which from various
apertures of the earth issue in springs and sulphur minerals and
volcanoes, as at Mount Etna in Sicily and in many other places.
The ancients called man the world in miniature, and certainly the name
is a happy one, because man being composed of earth, water, air and
fire, the body of the earth resembles the body of man.  As man has in
him bones for the support and framework of his flesh, likewise in the
world the rocks are the supports of the earth; as man has in him a pool
of blood in which the lungs rise and fall in their breathing, so the
body of the earth has its ocean which rises and falls every six hours
as if the world breathed; as from the aforesaid pool of blood veins
issue which ramify throughout the human body, so does the ocean
fill the body of the earth with innumerable veins of water.  The body
of the earth lacks sinews, which do not exist because sinews are made
for movement, and the world being in perpetual stability no movement
occurs, and there being no movement, sinews are not necessary; but in
all other points they resemble each other greatly.
Water is the driver of nature.
In explaining the action of water remember to cite experience first and
then reason.
Do not forget that you must put forward propositions adducing the
above-mentioned facts as illustrations, not as propositions,--that
would be too simple.
Water in itself has no stability and cannot move of its own accord,
save to descend.  Water of its own accord does not cease to move unless
it is shut in.
The body of the earth, like the body of animals, is intersected with
ramifying veins, which are all united and constructed for the
nourishment and life of the earth and of its creatures.
The water which rises in the mountains is the blood which keeps the
mountain alive, and through this conduit or vein, nature, the helper of
her creatures, prompt in the desire to repair the loss of the moisture
expended, proffers the desired aid abundantly; just as in a stricken
spot in man you will see, owing to the aid which is brought, the blood
abound under the skin in a swelling, so as to succour the spot which
has been stricken; likewise, in the case of the vine, when it is cut at
its extremity, nature causes its moisture to rise from the lowest root
to the end of the extremity which has been cut, and when this moisture
has been expended nature ceases not to supply it with vital moisture to
the end of its life.
Water is that which is given to supply vital moisture to this arid
earth; and the cause which propels it through its ramifications against
the natural course of weighty matter is the same which stirs the
humours in every kind of animal body.
Water, the vital moisture of the earthly machine, moves by reason of
its natural heat.
Rivers, with their ruinous inundations, seem to me the most potent of
all causes of terrestrial losses, and not fire, as some have
maintained; because the violence of fire is exhausted where there is
nothing forthcoming to feed it.  The flowing of water, which is
maintained by sloping valleys, ends and dies at the lowest depth of the
valley; but fire is caused by fuel and the movement of water by
incline.  The fuel of fire is disunited, and its damage is disunited
and isolated, and fire dies where there is no fuel.  The incline of
valleys is united, and damage caused by water is collective, along with
the ruinous course of the river, until with its valley it winds into
the sea, the universal base and sole haven of the wandering waters of
rivers.  But what voice or words shall I find to express the disastrous
ravages, the incredible upheavals, the insatiable rapacity, caused by
the headstrong rivers?  What can I say?  Certainly I do not feel myself
equal to such a demonstration, yet by experience I will try to relate
the process of ruin of the rivers which destroy their banks and against
which no mortal bastion can prevail.
The recesses of the bottom of the sea are perennial, the summits of
mountains are transitory, whence it follows that the earth will become
 spherical and covered with waters, and will be uninhabitable.
The shores of the sea continually increase in soil, towards the middle
of the sea; the cliffs and promontories of the sea are continually
being ruined and consumed; the mediterranean seas will dry up and all
that will remain will be the channel of the greatest river which enters
into them; this will flow to the ocean and pour out its waters together
with that of all the rivers which are its tributaries.
The subterranean courses of water, like those which are made between
the air and the earth, are those which continually consume and deepen
the beds of their currents.  The earth which is carried by rivers is
discharged at the end of their course, that is to say, the earth
carried from the highest part of the river's course is discharged at
the lowest depth of its course.  Where fresh water arises in the sea,
the miracle of the creation of an island is manifest, which will be
discovered sooner or later in proportion as the quantity of water is
greater or less.  And an island of this kind is formed by the deposit
of earth and stones made by the subterranean current of water in the
channels through which it passes.
Nature never breaks her laws.
Nature is constrained by the cause of her laws which dwells inborn in
her.
Without reason no effect is produced in nature; understand the reason
and you will not need experience.
Before I proceed further I will make some experiments, because it is my
intention to cite the experiment first and then to demonstrate by
reasoning how such an experiment must necessarily take effect in such a
manner.  And this is the true rule by which investigations of natural
phenomena must proceed; and although nature herself begins from the
reason and ends in the result, we must pursue the contrary course and
begin, as I said above, from experience and by it seek out the reason.
Before deducing a general rule from this case repeat the experiment two
or three times and see if the same results are produced.
It several bodies of equal weight and shape are dropped one after
another at equal intervals of time, the distances between each
successive body will be equally increased.
The experiment to prove the above-mentioned theorem respecting motion
must be made thus: Take two balls of equal weight and shape and let
them fall from a great height so that when they start falling they
touch one another, and let the investigator stand on the ground and
watch whether the contact is maintained during their fall.  This
experiment must be repeated several times, so that the trial may not be
marred by any accident and the experiment vitiated and the spectator
deceived.
We know definitely that sight is infinitely swift and in an instant of
time perceives countless shapes, nevertheless it only sees one object
at a time.  Let us take an example.  You, O reader, will see the whole
of this written page at a glance, and you will instantly realize that
it is full of various letters, but you will not realize at that moment
what these letters are nor what they signify; wherefore you will have
to proceed word by word and line by line to take cognizance of these
letters.  Again, if you wish to reach the summit of a building you must
mount step by step, otherwise it will be impossible for you to
reach the summit.  And therefore I say to you whom nature has drawn to
this art, if you wish to attain to a thorough knowledge of the forms of
objects, you will begin by studying the details, and not proceed to the
second until you have committed the first to memory and mastered it in
practice, and if you do otherwise you will be wasting your time and
protracting your studies.  And remember first of all to acquire
diligence, which signifies speed.
Of the nature of the eye.  Here are the forms, here the colours, here
the form of every part of the universe are concentrated in a point, and
that point is so great a marvel!  O marvellous and stupendous
necessity! thou dost compel by thy law, and by the most direct path,
every effect to proceed from its cause.  These things are verily
miracles!  I wrote in my Anatomy how in so small a space the visual
faculty can be reproduced and formed again in its whole expanse.
In many cases one and the same thing is attracted by two violent
forces,--necessity and power.  The water falls in rain and by necessity
the earth absorbs the humidity; the sun causes it to evaporate, not of
necessity, but by power.
The pupil of the eye in the air expands and contracts according to
every degree of motion made by the sun.  And with every dilation or
contraction the same object will appear of a different size, although
frequently the relative scale of surrounding circumstances does not
allow us to perceive these variations in any single object we look at.
The pupil of the eye dilates and contracts in proportion to the variety
of bright and dark objects which are reflected in it.  In this case
nature has afforded compensation to the visual faculty by contracting
the pupil of the eye when it is offended by excess of light and by
causing it to dilate when offended by excess of darkness, like the
opening of the purse.  And nature here behaves like the man who has too
much light in his house and closes half the window, or more or less of
it according to need; and when night comes he opens the window
altogether so as to see better inside his house, and nature here adopts
a continued process of compensation, by continually regulating and
readjusting the expansion and contracting of the pupil, in proportion
to the aforesaid obscurity and light which are continually reflected in
it.
When you collect facts relating to the science of the motion of water,
remember to place under every proposition the uses to which it may be
applied, in order that this knowledge may not be fruitless.
This is a difficult question to answer, but I will nevertheless state
my opinion.  Water, which is clothed with air, desires naturally to
cleave to its sphere because in this position it is without gravity.
This gravity is twofold,--the gravity of the whole which tends to the
centre of the elements, and the gravity which tends to the centre of
the waters of the spherical orb; if this were not so the water would
form a half sphere only, which is the sphere described from the centre
upwards.  But I see no means in the human mind of acquiring knowledge
with regard to this.  We must say, as we say of the magnet which
attracts iron, that such a virtue is an occult property of which there
is an infinite quantity in nature.
In the motion of earth against earth the repercussion of the portion
struck is slight.
Water struck by water, eddies in circles around the spot where the
shock has taken place.
The reverberation of the voice continues for a great distance
through the air; for a greater distance through fire.  The mind travels
for a still greater distance through the universe; but since it is
finite it does not penetrate into infinity.
If the water which rises on the summits of the mountains comes from the
sea, whence it is propelled by its weight to a greater height than that
of the mountains, why has this portion of the element of water the
power to elevate itself to such an altitude and to penetrate the earth
by so great an expenditure of labour and time, when the residue of the
element of water, whose only obstacle is the air which does not impede
it, is not able to raise itself to a similar altitude?  And thou who
didst devise this theory, go and study nature, so that thou mayst cease
to acquire such opinions of which thou hast made so great a collection,
together with the capital and interest which thou dost possess.
The sphere of the earth has gravity which increases in proportion to
the lightness of the element which contains it.
Fire is light in its sphere and its lightness increases in proportion
to the weight of the element which contains it.
No primary element has gravity or lightness in its own sphere.
The motion made by bodies which possess gravity to the common centre is
not produced by the tendency of the body to find this centre, nor is it
caused by attraction made by the centre, as by a magnet, drawing the
weight towards it.
Why does not the weight remain in its place?
It does not remain because it has no resistance.
And whither will it tend?
It will tend to the centre of the earth.
And why not along other lines?
Because the weight which meets with no resistance will descend by the
shortest way to the lowest depth, and the lowest depth is the centre of
the earth.
And how does a weight find the centre of the earth with such directness?
Because it does not proceed at random, wandering by diverse courses.
Instrumental science, that is to say, mechanics, is the most noble and
most useful of sciences, inasmuch as by means of it all living bodies
which have movement act; and this movement has its origin in the
centre of gravity which is placed in the middle, dividing unequal
weights, and it has dearth and wealth of muscles and lever also and
counter-lever.
Since these things are far more ancient than letters, it is no wonder
if in our day no records exist to tell how these seas filled so many
countries.  But if some record had existed, conflagrations, floods,
wars, changes of tongues and laws have consumed all that is ancient;
sufficient for us is the testimony of objects born in the salt waters
and found again in the high mountains far off from the seas of those
times.
Heat causes moisture to move, and cold arrests it; as is seen in a cold
country which arrests the motion of the clouds in the air.  Where there
is life there is heat, where there is vital heat there is movement of
moisture.
The act of cutting out the nostrils of a horse is a piece of ludicrous
folly.  And the foolish indulge in this practice as though they
considered nature had failed to supply necessary wants, and man had
therefore to supplement her work.  Nature made two apertures in the
nose, which each in itself is half as large as the lung pipe
whence breath proceeds, and if these apertures did not exist the mouth
would abundantly suffice for breathing purposes.  And if you said to
me, Why has nature thus provided animals with nostrils if respiration
through the mouth is sufficient?--I would answer that nostrils are made
to be used when the mouth is employed in masticating its food.
If a tree has been stripped of its bark in some spot, nature makes
provision for this and gives a greater supply of nourishing sap to the
stripped portion than to any other, so that in place of what has been
taken away the bark grows thicker than in any other spot.  And so
impetuous is the motion of the sap that when it reaches the spot which
is to be healed, it rises higher like a bounding ball, in bubbles, not
unlike boiling water.
Nature has so placed the leaves of the latest shoots of many trees that
the sixth leaf is always above the first, and thus in continued
succession unless the rule is obstructed.  And this she has done for
two useful purposes in the plant: firstly, since the branches and the
fruit of the following year spring from the bud or eye which is above
and in contact with the juncture of the leaves, the water which
feeds the shoot may be able to run down and nourish the bud, through
the drop being caught in the hollow whence the leaf springs.  And the
second advantage is that as these buds shoot in the following year, one
will not be covered by the other, since the five shoots spring on five
different sides.
In order to arrive at knowledge of the motions of birds in the air, it
is first necessary to acquire knowledge of the winds, which we will
prove by the motions of water in itself, and this knowledge will be a
step enabling us to arrive at the knowledge of beings that fly between
the air and the wind.
The reason of this is that small birds being without down cannot
support the intense cold of the high altitudes in which the vultures
and eagles or and other great birds, well supplied with down and
clothed with many kinds of feathers, [fly].  Again, the small birds,
having delicate and thin wings, support themselves in the low air,
which is denser, and they could not bear up in the rarer air, which
affords slighter resistance.
The shafts formed in the shoulders of the wings of birds have been so
devised by ingenious nature as to occasion a convenient pliancy
in the direct impetus which often occurs in the swift flight of birds,
since she found it more practical to bend a small part of the wing in
the direct flight than the whole of it.
O time! swift devourer of all created things!  How many kings, how many
nations, thou hast overthrown, how great changes of kingdoms and
diverse vicissitudes have succeeded one another, since the marvellous
body of this fish, which perished in the caverns and intricate recesses
[of the mountain].  Now undone by time, thou liest patient in this
confined spot; with thy fleshless and bare bones thou hast built the
framework and the support of the mountain that is above thee.
Unconscious life remains in what is dead, which when reunited to the
stomach of living men, reacquires sentient and conscious life.
Men are chosen to be physicians in order to minister to diseases of
which they are ignorant.
Every man wishes to amass money in order to give it to the physicians
who are the destroyers of life; they ought therefore to be rich.
Take pains to preserve thy health; and thou wilt all the more easily do
this if thou avoidest physicians, because their drugs are a kind of
alchemy, and there are as many books on this subject as there are on
medicine.
Oh! meditators on perpetual motion, how many vain projects of similar
character you have devised!  Go and join the seekers of gold.
The water which flows in a river moves either because it is summoned or
driven, or because it moves of its own accord.  If it is summoned,--and
I mean sought after,--who is the seeker?  If it is driven, who is the
driver?  If it moves of its own accord, it gives evidence of reasoning;
and reasoning in bodies which continually change their shape is
impossible, because in such bodies there is no consciousness.
I wish to work miracles.  I may have less than other and less energetic
men; and those who wish to grow rich in a day live a long time in great
poverty, as happens, and will always happen, to alchemists, who seek to
make gold and silver, and to the engineers who wish from still water to obtain life and perpetual motion, and to the supreme
fool,--the necromancer and the magician.
There is no part of astronomy which does not depend on the visual lines
and on perspective, the daughter of painting; because the painter is he
who by the necessity of his art has begotten perspective, and it is
impossible to do without lines which include all the various figures of
the bodies begotten by nature and without which the art of geometry is
blind.  And while the geometrist reduces every surface surrounded by
lines to a square, and each body to the figure of the cube, and
mathematics do the same with their cube roots and square roots, these
two sciences deal only with the continuous and discontinuous quantity,
but they do not deal with the quality which constitutes the beauty of
the works of nature and the ornament of the world.
Here the adversary will say that he does not want so much knowledge,
and the mere skill of depicting nature will suffice him.  To which I
make reply that there is no greater error than to trust to our
judgement without other reasoning, as experience, the enemy of
alchemists, necromancers and other foolish intellects, has in all times
proved.
The lying interpreters of nature affirm that quicksilver is the common
seed of all metals.  They do not bear in mind that nature raises
substances according to the diversity of things which she wishes to
produce in the world.
The belief in necromancy is reputed to be the most foolish of all human
opinions.  It is the sister of alchemy which gives birth to simple and
natural things; but it is all the more reprehensible than alchemy,
inasmuch as it brings forth nothing but what is like itself, that is,
lies.  This is not the case with alchemy, which is confined to the
simple products of nature, and whose function cannot be performed by
nature herself, because in it there are no organic instruments with
which it can work, such as the hands are to man and which have enabled
him to make glass, &c.  But necromancy, the flag and flying banner,
blown hither and thither by the winds, is the guide of the silly
multitude, which constantly bears witness with gaping wonder to the
countless effects of this art; and whole books are written which
declare that incantations and spirits are efficacious and speak without
tongues and without vocal organs, without which it is impossible to
speak, and carry the heaviest weights, raising tempests and rain and
transforming men into cats, wolves and other beasts, although
they who affirm such things are the first to be transformed into
beasts.  And certainly if such necromancy existed, as is believed by
lower intellects, there is nothing on the earth which would be so
effectual both as regards the service and detriment of man; because if
it is true that this art has the power to disturb the calm serenity of
the atmosphere, changing it into night and producing sparks and winds,
with fearful thunder and lightnings that fly through the darkness, and
overthrowing high buildings with violent winds and uprooting forests
and striking armies and shattering and overwhelming them, and
producing, in addition to this, devastating storms which rob the
peasants of the fruits of their toil, what kind of warfare is there so
deadly to the enemy?  Who in naval warfare can be compared with him who
commands the winds and generates storms which ruin and sink any fleet
whatsoever?  Certainly he who could dispose of such violent forces
would be the lord of nations, and no human skill could resist his
deadly power.  The hidden treasures and gems concealed in the body of
the earth would be manifest unto him.  He would let himself be borne
through the air from the east to the west, and through all the opposed
regions of the universe.  But why should I proceed further?  What thing
is there which could not be effected by such an art?  Nothing, save
the discovery of immortality.  And if it is true, why has it not
remained among men who so greatly desired it, and led them to disregard
any deity?  And I know that there are many who to satisfy a whim would
destroy God and the universe.  And if necromancy has not remained with
man in spite of its being so necessary to him it can never have
existed, nor will it ever exist according to the definition of the
spirit which is invisible in the body, for in the elements there are no
incorporate things, for where there is no body there is a vacuum, and a
vacuum cannot exist in the elements because it would be immediately
filled by them.
The eye in its given distances and by its given means deceives itself
in the performance of its functions less than any other sense, because
it sees in straight lines which form a cone, the base of which is the
object it perceives, and transmits it to the eye, as I intend to prove.
But the ear greatly deceives itself as to the position and distance of
the objects it apprehends, because the sonorous waves do not reach it
in straight lines, like those of the eye, but by tortuous and reflex
lines, and often the most remote seem to be nearest, owing to the
peregrinations of such waves, although the voice of the echo is
transmitted to the sense by straight lines only.  The smell is less
certain of the spot whence the odour arises, but taste and touch
alone come into direct contact with the object which they apprehend.
The smallest natural point is larger than all mathematical points, and
the proof of this is that the natural point has continuity, and
everything which has continuity is infinitely divisible; but the
mathematical point is indivisible because it is not a quantity.  Every
continuous quantity is mentally infinitely divisible.  Among the
magnitude of things which are among us, the chief of all is
nothingness; and its function extends to matter that does not exist,
and its essence is in time in the past or in the future, and it has
nothing of the present.  This nothingness has its part equal to the
whole and the whole to the part, and the divisible to the indivisible,
and produces the same result by addition or subtraction, or if it be
divided or multiplied,--as is proved by arithmeticians by their tenth
character, which represents nothing.  And its power does not extend to
the things of nature.
That which is called nothingness is found only in time and in words: in
time it is found in the past and future, and not in the present; and
thus in words among things which are said to be nonexistent or
impossible.  In time nothingness dwells in the past and the future, and
not at all in the present, and in nature it resides among the things
which are impossible.  Whence from that which has been said, it
has no being, because where there is nothingness there would be a
vacuum.
With regard to this matter, we have said on the previous page that the
definition of a spirit is a power united with a body, because it cannot
move of its own accord nor acquire any kind of motion.  And if you say
that it moves itself, this cannot be within the elements, because if
the spirit is an incorporate quantity this quantity is a vacuum and the
vacuum does not exist in nature, and if it did exist it would be
immediately filled by the rushing in of the element in which the vacuum
was formed.  So according to the definition of weight which runs:
"Gravity is an accidental power created by one element attracted to or
suspended in another," it follows that no element, weighing nothing in
its own element, can have weight in the element which is above it and
lighter than it; for instance, no one part of water has no more gravity
or lightness than any other part, but if you were to draw it up into
the air, it would acquire weight, and this weight cannot sustain itself
by itself; and it must therefore inevitably fall, and thus wherever
there is a vacuum in water it will fall in.  The same thing would
happen with a spirit among the elements where it would continuously
generate a vacuum in whatever element it might find itself, for
which reason it is inevitable that it would move in a constant flight
to the sky until it had quitted these elements.
We have proved that a spirit cannot exist in the elements without a
body, nor move of itself by voluntary motion unless it be to rise
upwards.  But now we will say that if such a spirit took a body made of
air it would inevitably melt into air, because if it remained united it
would be separated and fall and form a vacuum, as we have described
above.  Therefore if it desired to remain in the air it is necessary
that it should blend with a quantity of air, and if it were united with
the air, two difficulties arise: that is, that it will rarefy that
portion of air with which it is mingled, and this rarefied air will fly
upwards and will not remain in the air which is heavier than itself;
and besides this the ethereal spiritual essence is disunited, and its
nature is changed, for which reason that nature loses some of its first
virtue.  There is in addition to these a third difficulty, and this is
that a body of this kind, made of air and assumed by the spirits, is
exposed to the penetrating winds which continually sunder and scatter
the united portions of the air, eddying and whirling amidst the rest of
the atmosphere; therefore the spirit who would pervade this air
would be dismembered or rent and broken up with the rending of the air
of which it formed part.
It is impossible that the spirit, incorporated with a certain quantity
of air, should move this air; and this is proved by the passage where
it is said that "the spirit rarefies that portion of the air with which
it is mingled."  This air therefore will rise high above the other air,
and the air will be set in motion by its own lightness and not by the
volition of the spirit, and if this air encounters a wind, the air will
be moved by the wind and not by the spirit which is incorporated in it.
In order to show whether the spirit can speak or not it is first
necessary to define the voice and the manner of its origin.  The
following will be our definition: The voice is the movement of air in
friction against a dense body, or a dense body in friction against the
air (which is the same idea), and by this friction of the dense and the
rare what is rare is condensed, and resistance is caused; and again,
when the rare in swift motion and the rare in slow motion come into
contact, they condense one another and produce sound, and a great noise
is made.  The sound or murmur made by the rare moving through the rare
with slow motion is like the great flame whence sounds issue in
the air; the exceedingly great noise made by the rare, when the air
which is rare and swift mingles with that which is rare and in [slow]
motion, is like the flame of fire issuing from a great gun and striking
against the air; likewise the flame when it issues from a cloud strikes
the air as it begets the thunderbolt.  Therefore we will say that the
spirit cannot produce a voice unless the air be set in motion, but
since there is no air within, it cannot discharge what it does not
possess; and if it wishes to move that air in which it is incorporated,
it is necessary that the spirit should multiply itself; but that which
has no quantity cannot be multiplied.  In the fourth place it is said,
that no rare body can move if it has not a stable spot whence it may
take its motion, and more especially is this the case when an element
must move in its own element, which does not move of itself, excepting
by uniform evaporation at the centre of the thing evaporated; as occurs
in the case of the sponge squeezed in the hand under water, whence the
water escapes in every direction with equal motion through the spaces
between the fingers of the hand which squeezes it.  As to whether the
spirit has an articulate voice and can be heard, and as to what are
hearing and sight--the wave of the voice travels through the air as the
images of objects travel to the eye.
O mathematicians, clear up this error!  The spirit cannot have a voice,
for where there is a voice there is a body, and where there is a body
there is occupation of space, which prevents the eye seeing what is
behind that space; therefore a body fills all the surrounding air, that
is to say, with its own image.
There can be no voice where there is no motion or percussion of the
air, there can be no percussion of the air where there is no
instrument, there can be no such thing as an immaterial instrument; and
this being so, a spirit can have neither voice, nor shape, nor force;
and if it assumes a shape it can neither penetrate nor enter where the
issues are closed.  If any one were to say that a spirit may take
bodies of various shapes by means of concentrated and compressed air,
and by means of this instrument speak and move with force--I reply to
this argument that where there are no nerves or bones, no force can be
expended in any movement made by these imaginary spirits.
